---
description: Learn about how to query entities using the automatic CRUD API.
keywords: [ChiselStrike, documentation, tutorial, entity, query, CRUD, API]
---

# Step 6: Querying entities

Most applications require the ability to query a dataset with filtering and
ordering on the results. The CRUD API generated by ChiselStrike has these
capabilities built in.

:::note

A filter is similar to a SQL `WHERE` clause, and ordering is similar to a SQL
`ORDER BY` clause.

:::

Here again is the `BlogPost` entity that you defined previously:

```ts title="my-backend/models/BlogPost.ts"
export class BlogPost extends ChiselEntity {
    author: string = "Anonymous"
    content: string
    publishedAt: number
    hidden: boolean
}
```

And here is the data set that resulted from following all of the instructions in
the prior step:

```json
  {
    "id": "[GENERATED-ID]",
    "author": "Dejan",
    "content": "...",
    "publishedAt": 777,
    "hidden": true
  },
  {
    "id": "[GENERATED-ID]",
    "author": "Glauber",
    "content": "...",
    "publishedAt": 999,
    "hidden": false
  },
  {
    "id": "[GENERATED-ID]",
    "author": "Pekka",
    "content": "...",
    "publishedAt": 888,
    "hidden": false
  }
```

## Filter on a single entity property

To query for only posts that were authored by "Glauber", you can use a filter on
the `author` property:

```bash
curl "localhost:8080/dev/posts?.author=Glauber"
```

```json
{
  "results": [
    {
      "id": "[GENERATED-ID]",
      "author": "Glauber",
      "content": "...",
      "publishedAt": 999,
      "hidden": false
    }
  ]
}
```

Note that you are still using the same base URL for BlogPost entities, but you
are now adding a query string parameter to specify the filter. The name of the
query string parameter is `.<property>`, where the name of the entity property is
prefixed by a period character.

:::caution

When building query strings, you should always URL-encode properties and values
so they are safe to insert into the query string. If you're using an HTTP client
library to build the URL, it might do this for you automatically. In this
tutorial, we will not have occasion to escape any keys or values for simplicity.

:::

## Filter on multiple entity properties

You can specify multiple filters by combining them as mutiple query string
parameters in the query string. Parameters are separated by an ampersand (`&`),
and they are always combined using a logical-AND operation. To filter for posts
authored by Glauber that are also not hidden:

```bash
curl "localhost:8080/dev/posts?.author=Glauber&.hidden=false"
```

This will yield the same matching entity from above.  However, if you change the
`hidden` filter to true:

```bash
curl "localhost:8080/dev/posts?.author=Glauber&.hidden=true"
```

You will receive no matching results:

```json
{
  "results": []
}
```

## Range filters

You can query for ranges of values of a property by composing a parameter name
that indicates what kind of comparison to perform.

To query for posts whose `publishedAt` property value is greater than 800:

```bash
curl "localhost:8080/dev/posts?.publishedAt~gt=800"
```

Note that the name of the filter parameter has `~gt` appended to it. This is
short for "greater than". ChiselStrike supports a number of filter options,
including inequality, greater/less than, and string "like" (simliar to SQL
`LIKE`). See the entire list in the reference documentation.

The above query yields results similar to this:

```json
{
  "results": [
    {
      "id": "[GENERATED-ID]",
      "author": "Glauber",
      "content": "...",
      "publishedAt": 999,
      "hidden": false
    },
    {
      "id": "[GENERATED-ID]",
      "author": "Pekka",
      "content": "...",
      "publishedAt": 888,
      "hidden": false
    }
  ]
}
```
